Shear failure due to impact pressure in water-filled cracks
As the clay in a sea dike cover is subject to drying and wetting, changes in water content occur. The resulting shrinking and expanding of the clay in the unsaturated zone generally lead to the formation of two types of cracks:
pull-cracks: usually occur when soil shrinks. These cracks are differently oriented according to their size - larger shrinkage cracks (up to one meter) are almost always vertical and begin directly at the dike surface, smaller cracks (up to 20cm) may occur in all directions and can be found in the entire clay layer;
shear cracks: are generally smaller (up to 20cm) than the pull-cracks and usually occur in shear areas that are caused by the swelling of clay. Those cracks occur in all directions.
The impact pressure acting on those cracks, especially the large (0.5m to 1m) pull-cracks that begin directly at the slope surface, may result in a shear failure and consequently in significant damage of the clay cover. Moreover, according to the recent study of Berkenbrink et al (2007) who performed photo-elastic, small-scale tests on cracks in a dike subject to impact pressures the impact pressure is transmitted not only into the crack walls, but also, to some extent, inside the dike, through the crack.
The problem of shear failure in cracks subject to impact pressure was theoretically investigated by Führböter (1966) who proposed a conceptual model for the calculation of the shear failure angle and by Richwien (2002) who developed a simplified, graphical method for the estimation of shear failure occurrence possibility. More detailed these methods are given by Stanczak et al. (2007a). Although those conceptual models are widely referred to, they were never verified experimentally. However, since the model of Richwien (2002) provides only very general information on the possibility of shear failure, only the model of Führböter (1966) which provides more detailed information, including shear failure angle, will be referred to in the present study.
Erosion of the dike core
After the removal of the entire dike revetment, i.e grass and clay cover, the sand core of the dike becomes unprotected and the last phase of the dike breaching process - sand core erosion - begins. Due to variable flow conditions, this phase should be divided into two parts: (i) breach development , i.e. erosion of the front face of the breach due to the repeated action of breaking waves and (ii) sand wash-out, i.e. breach deepening and widening as a result of the overflow and of the instability of the breach side slopes due to scouring erosion. Although currently no information on the erosion processes of the unprotected dike core is available,the extensive knowledge of the dune and beach erosion processes can be used to a certain extent. Generally, two approaches are available: (i) wave impact approach and (ii) beach profile approach.
